This video is made possible by vier watches,
luxury hands crafted watches out fair prices. You can check them out at vier
watches.com/biographics.
He was a king who's rain out, Sean, even the sun, Louie,
the 14th of France was one of history's major monarchs ruling with absolute
power for nearly three quarters of a century in Europe.
The length of his rule is unmatched globally.
His reputation is nearly unparalleled under the sun Kings watch the French
experience,
the grass Syla or the great C the period Aire called one of the
great centuries of civiliz art culture and fashion.
All flourished Versai was built. Power was centralized along its borders,
France expanded becoming the undisputed focal point of European life.
But was there more to the reign of Louie the 14th than a shiny French utopia
born into a time of civil strife. Louis was a product of war.
He constantly against his neighbors against Protestants and against the world.
And even as his armies racked up victories,
they sewed the seeds of Lara SI's bitter end,
but of the great towering figures of history. This is the complex life,
a France's brightest Royal star.
It was a dark and stormy night. And no,
we are not cribbing lines from Snoopy's typewriter. That is literally, uh,
the story of Louis. The 14th starts. Anyway,
it was a dark and stormy night and Louis the 13th was cursing. His awful luck.
Thanks to implement weather.
The king of France had become trapped at the apartments of his wife and of
Austria.
This was a problem because Louie the 13th and Anne detested one another,
not in an arguing about the dishes kind of way.
This was a hatred that burned so bright.
It could probably have been seen from space as a result.
The raw couple hadn't produced a single aired during their long marriage.
That all changed that stormy night, trapped it together,
Louie the 13th and Anne evidently put aside their differences.
By the time the sun rose the next morning,
Anne was pregnant with the future king.
At least that's the official version.
The unofficial one is that Anne may have been canoeing with her confidants,
Cardinal JUULs Mazari and the darkened stormy night was a story concocted
to save everyone a bit of embarrassment, whatever the truth.
Nine months later on September the fifth, 1638,
the future son king was born almost from the moment he emerged. Louis.
The 14th was being force fed evidence of his own importance.
Anne was a strict Catholic who told her son he was chosen by God to lead France
ever giving him the nickname Dodo given by God.
When Louis's brother Filip was born two years later,
she made the boy wear dresses and referred to him as my little girl as if to
remove any threat that he might pose to Louis's claim on the throne.
Not that Louis's childhood was all pampered though, for one thing,
Anne's belief in God's plan for her son made her somewhat careless as a mother.
The future king nearly drowned as a toddler because Anne wasn't paying attention
for another thing.
Louis had been born into mid 17th century France and mid century.
France was a society devouring itself rather than a unified nation.
1640s France was badly fractured with many provinces under defacto control of
not the crown, but powerful Nobles. When Louis the 13th died in 1643,
Anne and Cardinal Mazan set it up a Regency to rule in Louis the 14th name
and tried to reign in the power of these Nobles. Unfortunately,
those Nobles would rather burn the world than let their power decrease.
In 1648, France exploded into an ugly civil war known as the Fran.
This happens right in the middle of a war with Spain, other France height,
a Perian mob storms, the raw palace for Louise's blood.
Luckily this particular mob was less interested in recreational decapitation
than most per Perian mobs. And as they left Louis alive,
after the boy pretended to be asleep still the incident badly scarred him for
the rest of his life.
Louie would regard the French capital with utmost loathing by 1654,
Mazan had won the Fran for the crown that same summer,
the Cardinal had 15 year old Louis crowns king and a ceremony attended by almost
no one, not the Merin needed the crowds.
He was the real power behind the teenage king and everyone already knew it,
but mare wasn't the cartoon villain you're probably expecting,
although he kept Louis the 14th on a short leash,
he also taught him the dark arts of politics, how to manipulate people,
how to convince them.
Your great idea was actually their great idea gifts that would serve the
young king very well.
But Mazan also gave the boy a gift that he was less happy with.
When Louie decided to marry mare's niece Mazan was all like, uh, no,
you're actually gonna marry this princess to symbolically mark the end of this
stupid war that we've been fighting. Just deal with it. And that was how in 16,
60 Louis, the 14th came to marry Maria Teresa of Spain, a woman.
He hated only marginally less than his father had hated Anne.
But if this seemed like an ignoble start for the king,
who would be the most celebrated in French history,
just know that it's not going to last less than nine months after his unwanted
marriage.
Louis would be stepping out from behind Mazan shadow and in to the blinding
sunlight
On March the ninth, 1661,
Cardinal Mazan for the great Catholic party in the sky.
The very next day blew the 14th, made a surprise announcement.
He would not be replacing Cardinal Mazan with a new chief minister.
Instead he would rule France as an absolute Monarch.
This was one bosy move in 17th century.
France last absolute mono had been Henry the fourth,
who rule had ended over 50 years ago. This was like,
hell Cole casually announcing in 1995,
that Germany was going to revert to a military dictatorship.
How hell would such a thing even be possible?
But Lou was adamant had been put on earth by God to rule and
by God. Well, he was gonna rule the heck outta France, the show he was serious.
Lou had paintings commissioned of himself as Roman emperors and Greek gods.
He declared himself. Roy sole, the son king.
This caused some rumblings among the Nobles rumblings.
Louis would've been ill advised to ignore including the Frans that Nobles had
started 11 civil wars in the last four decades to paraphrase the old meme.
One did not simply declare oneself above the Nobles without a fight,
but Louis did not want a fight. No.
His plans for conquering the Nobles involved using the subtle arts that Mazan
had taught him. But first he needed a place to do it. Construction.
The palace of Versai began in 1661 using as its core,
an old Royal hunting lodge, some 20 kilometers outside of Paris.
Remember Howie had said, Louis hated Paris.
Well Versai was an expression of that hate 20 kilometers away may not sound like
much, but when your main form of transport is horse drawn carriage,
it sure feels a lot. And that was kind of the point.
Louis wanted to separate himself from the capital.
He also wanted to separate his court from anywhere.
The Nobles might have allies. If he could lure them away from their power bases,
if he could dazzle them with opulence,
if he could occupy their brains completely with courtly life,
well then they might not have enough time for civil war.
At first Louis's clever plan. It didn't quite pan out.
Noble's declared Versai is a mistres without a Meriter way of saying that it
looked like a building site and there was nothing to do.
But the sun king didn't wa in his course,
although the court moved around endlessly in these days,
it kept coming back to Fay. And when it did Louis ensured,
there was enough to occupy even the most macve mind. There were hunting trips,
gambling parties of such extravagance that engravings were made and sent how two
guides to the other courts of Europe, even the clothing worn was time consuming.
Louis decreed.
It must be French made at enormous cast and that only certain people could wear
certain colors. Naturally, this created competition among the Nobles elites,
who might otherwise have been discussing a big budget sequel to the front,
where instead scheming against one another have heard the right to wear blue
with gold and Louis backed all this weird new etiquette with action
Nobles who played by the rules, found themselves getting showered with gold.
Not literally.
That would be horrific while those who used were suddenly staring at empty
coffees, just as an exclusive new club can attract members purely because it is
exclusive.
The sun Kings court pulled in the Nobles purely because being there demonstrated
your ability.
You can see this clearest in the weird rituals undertaken each day,
come morning. All the Nobles were expected to watch Louie get dressed with some,
even helping the king into his shot, but rather than punishment,
the act of dressing,
the king was a reward and expression of a Nobles closeness to power and
closeness to power meant money before long Lou had the Nobles where he wanted
them fighting over were objectively ridiculous rituals while he floated Seren
above it all like some kind of ancient sun got it was the first big step
on the road to LA Gras Sierra.
It wouldn't be the last
While. The great parties of AAI may have been way of dazzling.
The Nobles like waving a light bulb in front of a bunch of moth swearing,
tiny powdered wigs.
That didn't mean the sun king was all calculation and no fun.
One of the nicknames for the Sierra was the reign of love.
And it wasn't meant in the sense of the love that a man has for a fine
Cuban cigar throughout his reign, the sun king. So many affairs,
he practically made infidelity into a spectator sport though,
was Louise der made of honor to Louis's sister-in-law Henrietta of England,
who Louise started pretending to see his cover for one of his other affairs and
wound up sleeping with her anyway,
but he didn't just stop with sleeping with her.
Louise was elevated to the position of King's official mistres,
which has to be the most French concept that we've ever heard.
And she was kept in luxury at her SI until her downfall.
That is Louis was eventually deposed and replaced by Marquis depo,
a woman of vast temper under which so cutting. She caused object terror,
but off Louis who set her up in her own private departments ad joining his own.
So we could have sex with her three times day Abbot that resulted in them having
seven children,
Louise meanwhile was packed off to a convent to live outta the rest of her life
in isolation. When she eventually died,
the king could barely manage a shrug of indifference,
but while the Marquis became Louis's main lover,
she wasn't the only one that Henrietta of England. We mentioned earlier,
wife of Louise's brother Philippe while Louis totally seduced her too.
Not that fully likely minded as he was himself sneaking off a nighttime Tris
with buff man's man, the Chava de Lorraine. In fact,
this whole attitude of free love permeated the sun Kings court,
everyone was sleeping with everyone in a nonstop orgy of well orgys.
But if that sounds kind of fun to you just know that it was only a 48 tiny
elite. Most of the regular folks of France were starving.
Those working on the Vai building site were barely making enough to afford food.
Those who complained were thrown in jail. So yes,
the great century was great for most people in the same way that the great
depression was great for the average human I E not at all still.
It's not like Louis was only playing mind games and making love despite having
an adultery schedule that would leave even Boris with an exhausted Johnson.
Lou found time to work for eight hours a day on kingly stuff every day,
along with finance minister, John Baptist, Gober he overhauled the economy,
building a network of canals,
roads and ports in a handful of years that transformed French life.
Louis was even slightly progressive for his time promoting ministers from the
bourgeois Z at the expense of Nobles, much to these same Nobles horror,
but the sun king would've been respected to death.
If he just spent time building roads and dropping his no
getting to the top of the European Royals in the 17th century meant one thing.
And one thing only meant going to war.
And just before we get into that quick word from our sponsor today,
if you want to look like European mobility,
but don't have the unlimited budget of that group. Well,
let me tell you a little something about today's sponsor in Sarah.
I'm wearing one right now. This is the of iner rogue,
but I've got a couple of others right here, this little table next to me,
this is a chrono S and this is their take on a pilot watch.
They're all great looking stuff for the chrono S they went for a nice blue
background, silver outside the pilot watch black strap,
black back black bezel looking good.
Also this Chronos is actually a 38 minute LA MEA. I've got little risks. So, uh,
they make different watches for different sizes. So look, it's a brand new year,
so why not start it off, right?
Put some confidence in your step with a great looking watch.
I think doing that can really set the pace for a whole year.
And I know it seems kind of like a silly, small thing that, you know, I mean,
in many ways it's just a watch, but it's so much more than that. A watch really,
you know, makes you feel good overall.
And Viera Watchers believe that luxury isn't about price or specification.
It's about detail and craftsmanship and Viera watches.
They've got a ton of that.
So go check out the full range of vier watches.com/biographics use the code
biographics on checkout for a special discount, thanks to vier for sponsoring.
And let's get back to it.
The issue with going to war is that even in an absolute monarchy,
your subjects tend not to take very kindly to being told,
to die on a battlefield without good reason with the economy expanding France's
minister called bear was eager to swallow up some new territory.
Ideally the Spanish net, what with today called Belgium and Luxemburg.
But while that was a good enough reason for Louie and Cal bear,
it wasn't for the public.
So the sun king set about finding a reason in the mid 1660s,
Louie announced that his marriage to the Spanish Maria to reasona meant the
Spanish Netherlands should for complicated dynastic reasons belonged to him.
Clearly the French king grasping at straws,
but it was also enough in may of 1667. Louis launched the war of devolution,
which should perhaps become known as the unprovoked invasion of Belgium.
Although the French made great gains international pressure from England forced
them to mostly withdraw leaving the Spanish Netherlands in Spanish hands.
But despite this setback, the wall, wasn't a failure for one thing.
The early French victories in the facts,
Louis had withdrawn under diplomatic pressure rather than in the face of great
losses, seriously boosted his popularity for another.
It cemented in many people's minds.
The idea that France had some sort of claim to the Spanish Netherlands. Now,
all Louie had to do was wait until the time was right, and he could try again,
that time came sooner than anyone was expecting.
In 1670 Louis signed a secret treaty with Charles II of England playing on the
facts. They were both Catholics to win over his former arrival. Then in 1672,
he, he launched his re invasion.
The new French attack on the Netherlands was so successful.
It's still known in Dutch history as Raja or the year of disaster.
It didn't help that in 1674, the British joined on Louis' side,
leaving the former Dutch ally out to dry. It wasn't until the Dutch leader,
William of orange married Charles II's niece,
that English and abandoned Louis and the war ended by that time though,
Louis had gotten what he wanted the gains made by the French armies in the
Franco Dutch war effectively created the modern French Belgium border Louise
snatch towns and cities from the Spanish Netherlands that would remain French
until today. Although he hadn't delivered the hammer blow against the Dutch,
he was hoping for,
we returned from the war at the height of his powers in Paris.
He was given the nickname, the great and people lined up to sing his praises.
Finally, it was here.
The Zenni Louis had imagined when he became an absolute Monarch.
Those years ago, the sun king at his noon day height,
but the king had forgotten what happens to the sun after it reaches its highest
point. It always sets Louis. The 14th didn't know it yet,
but the sun of his reign was already dipping towards the horizon.
From here on out. It was gonna be all downhill
From one perspective. The early 1680s should have been a time of triumph.
The Louis in 1682 building work on Versai was finally completed allowing the sun
king to permanently station his court in the most opulent building on earth.
From another perspective, though, the course of the decade had already been set.
Its well was already poisoned.
The trouble started in 1679 that year a police investigation revealed
many members of the,
a stock Christy had been visiting fortune tells and illegal act.
They were also using potions taking part in black mass and trying to poison
their rivals scores.
Upon scores of a size regulars were implicated most damaging for the king.
His mistres,
the Marquita Monte spawn was revealed to have used love potions on him.
The fallout of the affair of the poisons was felt all across French society.
Of course the sunk king changed tack ditching the party lifestyle and imposing
sobriety and Pty on his Nobles and replacing the Marquita Monte spa with the
Seba and PS Madam Zel deman. Of course,
this was just for the eyes of the public behind the scenes.
Everyone kept on gambling, drinking and having affairs,
but it left a nasty taste in the mouth.
One that poisoned the public against France's elites.
But if the affair of the poisons was a catastrophe,
Lou couldn't predict the next disaster. Well that was of his own making way,
way back in 1598,
Henry the fourth had signed the edict of not granting rights to the Protestants
of France known as the Hugos. They numbered around 1 million.
Most of them skilled artisans in the 80 plus years,
sins that integrated into French society.
But when the extremely Catholic Louie looked at them,
he didn't see a group with a valuable skillset. He saw outsiders invaders,
a swarm of for nothings.
So the sun king decided to do something about that in 1685,
Louis revoked the edict of not replacing it with the edict of font and blue
suddenly tolerance was out and persecution of murder was in Hugo churches were
destroyed. Schools were closed.
Protestants were sent into internal exile and those who refused to go were
executed. It was a cruel senseless policy.
It was also a spectacular own goal.
As news of Louis' decree spread outage swept of the Protestant nations refuge
was offered for the Hugos in PRSA and parts of the holy Roman AMBA in England.
It's actually from these fleeing Hugos that English gets the word refugee and
that's not all England of the tens of thousands of refugees that came to
England. Almost all of them carried some vital skill.
France lost so many of its best crafts people that entire industry suffered.
It's thought that today the EDIC to font and blue set sectors of the economy
back decades, but from Louis's perspective,
it had an even worse effect over in the Netherlands.
The protest William of orange was getting jumpy revoking.
The edict of NANS might be a warning sign.
Louis was going to invade again to stop it off.
England had just coronated the stormy Catholic James II without England on side
in any future war William knew the Netherlands was lost.
So he decided to force England onto his side in November 16, 88,
William of orange sets sale at the head of a huge invasion force.
If you ever heard that 10 66 was the last time Britain successfully was
conquered.
That's only because William of Orange's victory was so quick that everyone
forgets it. Within weeks of Williams landing,
a Tobe gems had been captured and the entire country turned pro orange.
The thing is Louis could have almost certainly stopped the glorious revolution
had he done.
So he would've gained a Catholic ally in James II and a chance to crush the
Protestant Dutch,
but Louis was simply too arrogant to believe that God wasn't on his side,
that England's Catholics would an rise up overthrow William.
By the time he realized what a geopolitical screwup had just committed.
It was too late without a drop of blood being else. William and his wife,
Mary were made joints monarchs of Englands in January 16, 89.
And just like that Catholicism in Britain went into terminal decline.
And just like that, Louis fortunes went into terminal decline two
On July, the first 1690, a huge French force gathered in Ireland,
try and restore James II to the English throne.
Instead they were defeated in the bloody bitter battle of the boy,
a Protestant victory that remains hugely controversial in Ireland, but by then,
Louie already had other troubles on his mind.
By 1690 France was embroiled in the war of the grand Alliance.
The war of the grand Alliance also known as the nine years.
War is one of those old timey conflicts.
That's super complicated to explain without us launching a whole new channel
named war graphics to walk us through it all since we don't have time for that,
just know it was in part triggered by the impending death of Karl I second of
Spain, Habsburg Karl was so inbreds that he was incapable of sirening,
an air that man who would rule Spain next was an open question.
So Louie tried to make the answer to that question.
France resulting in a long bloody inconclusive war that only petered out in
1697, Europe was exhausted.
And what was the worst part while everyone was to do it all over again,
three years after the war of the grands Alliance ended,
Karl died for real and Louis declared his own grandson, Philip,
the new king of Spain, to be fair to Louis.
He knew grabbing the Spanish throne would lead to another European meltdown,
but he felt he had no choice. What if one of his enemies grabs it in instead?
So with the heavy heart Louis press dooms day button on leg grand Sierra club,
the 13 years of fighting that followed were blessed.
The great century and more the crappy decade Francis's forces were
decimated.
Territory was lost at the same time that France was suffering on the world
stage, the sun king was suffering in private two as the war progressed,
Louis's son to of his grandsons,
his great grandson and great granddaughter all passed away in public.
The energy of the sun King's early years faded away, replaced by melancholy.
That seemed to turn everything a dull Midwinter, gray remarkably.
This misery actually won Louis public support.
It was said the king was carrying the nation's entire grief in this time of war.
When the war of Spanish succession finally came to a close in 17, 14,
the sun king had almost faded away while a late surge by the French had allowed
them to keep Louis's grandson on the Spanish throne.
It still felt like a failure.
Philip had been excluded from the line of French succession,
meaning Louis's dream of a unified France in Spain could not be realized.
Not that Louis had much longer left to dream. Anyway, Louis,
the 14th felt deathly ill adverse eye in August,
1715 on his deathbed,
the sunk king famously confessed to his surviving great grandson,
the future Louis, the 15th that he had gone to war for vanity's sake.
And as that, his grandson shouldn't be like him. Then with his final breath,
he declared I apart that the state will always remain the sunk king died on
September the first 1715 at the moment,
the sun set on his reign Louis the 14th had been on the throne for 72 years
and 110 days when he first became king, France had been a divided state,
the French monarchy, a secondary power. Now, as dusk finally fell,
it was across a France at the height of its powers.
Paris was the global center of fashion culture.
But if Louis thought in his last moments that the story ended here,
he was wrong over the next 74 years,
the system of government Louis had set up would osify into the anion regime
in 1789.
It was this regime that was overthrown in the greatest European upheaval of all
the French revolution. But that's for another video for now.
It's simply enough for us to bid farewell to Louis the 14th,
to perhaps the greatest French king to have ever lived.
He may have made mistakes. He may have been an autocrat,
but the son King's life is destined to forever sh shine throughout history,
visible even into the far distant future for a king as egotistical as Louis
the 14th. Well, that's exactly what he would've wanted.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do that thumbs up button below and don't forget to subscribe also.
Why not check out another channel from meek or geographics if you enjoy this,
I know you'll enjoy that as well. And thank you for watching.